Atlas for the End of the World
Precis

On May 20, 1570, Abraham Ortelius book collector and engraver from Antwerp published Theatrum Orbis Terrarum (Epitome of the Theater of the World) the world’s first Atlas. It laid bare a world of healthy ecosystems for immanent colonization and exploitation. Some 450 years later ‘The Atlas for the End of the World’ is a survey of what’s left. 

The Atlas is primarily a collection of maps that show the difference between the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) 2020 targets for achieving 17% global (terrestrial) protected habitat and what is actually on the ground in the world’s 35 biodiversity hotspots – the richest and most threatened biological regions on earth.  Each hotspot is subdivided into its constituent ecoregions and we show the degree to which each is meeting the target.  In addition to this, the Atlas includes maps of 420 major cities in the Hotspots which are sprawling into remnant habitat. 

The Atlas also includes a collection of world maps never before assembled in one collection. Subjects range from the history of urban growth to today’s global nuclear dump sites to regions where people are trying to restore degraded ecosystems on a large scale. The Atlas also includes a selection of photography titled ‘Guide to the Flora and Fauna of the World’ from the Singapore artist Zhao Renhui which eloquently captures the pathos of the Anthropocene. 

The main finding of this 3-year project is that a majority of the ecoregions in the world’s 35 hotspots fall well short of United Nations’ 2020 targets for protected lands, that many cities are projected to continue sprawling into the world’s most valuable habitat and that only a small number of the 195 nations who are party to the UN Convention on Biological Diversity have any semblance of spatial planning which would help reconcile conservation with economics. 

But this is not just another paean to paradise lost. On the contrary, this is a forensic and clear-eyed audit of the global garden and yet, as we explain in the accompanying essay, we are not for a moment hiding behind mapping’s ostensible neutrality; this Atlas hopes to inspire cultivation, not conquest. 